After the Cossack uprising against the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1648, Hetman Bohdan Khmelnytskyi agreed to the Treaty of Pereyaslav in January 1654. The exact nature of the relationship established by this treaty between the Cossack Hetmanship and Russia remains a subject of scholarly controversy. [4] The agreement precipitated the Russo-Polish War of 1654-1667 and the failed Peace Treaty of Hadiach, which resulted in the formation of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. As a result, according to the Treaty of Eternal Peace, signed in 1686, the eastern part of Ukraine (east of the Dnipro River) was to come under the rule of Russia,[5] 146,000 rubles were to be paid to Poland as compensation for the loss of Right Bank Ukraine,[6] and the parties agreed not to sign a separate treaty with the Ottoman Empire.[6] The treaty met strong protests in Poland and was not ratified by the Polish-Lithuanian Diet until 1710. The legal legitimacy of its ratification is contested.[8] According to Jacek Staszewski, the agreement was confirmed by a decision of the Diet before its session in 1764.[9]

During the Great Northern War, Hetman Ivan Mazepa entered into an alliance with Sweden's Charles XII in 1708. However, the Great Frost of 1709 greatly weakened the Swedish army. After the Battle of Poltava, later in 1709, the power of the Hetmanship weakened, culminating in the abolition of the Cossack Hetmanship in the 1760s and the destruction of Zaporizhzhya Sich in the 1770s. After the partition of Poland (1772–1795) and Russia's conquest of the Crimean Khanate, the Russian Empire and Habsburg Austria controlled all the territories that make up modern Ukraine for more than a hundred years. Ukrainian nationalism developed in the 19th century.

A chaotic period of war followed the Russian Revolution of 1917, as well as the simultaneous war in the former Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomyria following the collapse of the Habsburg Monarchy after World War I. After that, there was the Soviet-Ukrainian war (1917–1921). , over which the Bolshevik Red Army established control at the end of 1919.[10] The Ukrainian Bolsheviks, who defeated the national government in Kyiv, created the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, which on December 30, 1922 became one of the founding republics of the Soviet Union. The initial Soviet policy regarding the Ukrainian language and Ukrainian culture made Ukrainian the official language of administration and schools. The politics of the 1930s turned to Russification. In 1932 and 1933, millions of people in Ukraine, mostly peasants, starved to death in a devastating famine known as the Holodomor. According to estimates, 6 to 8 million people died of hunger in the Soviet Union during this period, of which 4 to 5 million were Ukrainians.[11]

After the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany invaded Poland in September 1939, the territory of the Ukrainian SSR expanded westward. Axis armies occupied Ukraine from 1941 to 1944. During World War II, elements of the Ukrainian Insurgent Army fought for the independence of Ukraine against both Germany and the Soviet Union, while other elements collaborated with the Nazis, helping them carry out the Holocaust in Ukraine and their oppression of Poles. In 1953, Mykyta Khrushchev, an ethnic Russian and former head of the Communist Party of Ukraine, became head of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and granted more political and cultural freedom, leading to a Ukrainian renaissance. In 1954, the republic expanded to the south with the transfer of Crimea from Russia. However, as in other parts of the USSR, political repression against poets, historians and other representatives of the intelligentsia continued.

Ukraine became independent again when the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991. This ushered in the period of the beginning of the market economy, during which Ukraine experienced an eight-year recession.[12] However, the economy subsequently experienced high GDP growth until it collapsed during the Great Recession.

A protracted political crisis began on November 21, 2013, when President Viktor Yanukovych suspended preparations to implement an association agreement with the European Union, preferring instead to seek closer ties with Russia. This decision led to the Euromaidan protests, and later to the Revolution of Dignity. Then, in February 2014, the Ukrainian parliament impeached Yanukovych. On February 20, the Russian-Ukrainian war began, when Russian troops entered Crimea. Shortly thereafter, pro-Russian riots swept through the predominantly Russian-speaking eastern and southern regions of Ukraine, where Yanukovych drew most of his support. In the Ukrainian autonomous region of Crimea, where ethnic Russians predominate, a referendum not recognized by the international community was held, and it was Crimea that was de facto annexed by Russia on March 18, 2014. The war in Donbas began in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine with the participation of the Russian military. The war lasted until February 24, 2022, when Russia launched a major offensive.
During the Iron Age, these peoples were followed by the Dacians, as well as nomadic peoples such as the Cimmerians (archaeological Novocherkassk culture), Scythians, and Sarmatians. The Scythian kingdom existed here from 750 to 250 BC.[19] In the Scythian campaign of Darius the Great in 513 BC. the Persian Achaemenid army subjugated several Thracian peoples and practically all other regions of the European part of the Black Sea, such as parts of present-day Bulgaria, Romania, Ukraine, and Russia. he returned to Asia Minor. The Greeks colonized the Crimea and other coastal regions of Ukraine in the 7th or 6th century BC during the Archaic period.[22] Culturally, the Greek Bosporus kingdom flourished until it was invaded and occupied by the Goths and Huns in the 4th century AD. From 62 to 68 AD, the Roman Empire briefly annexed the kingdom under Emperor Nero, when he deposed the Bosporan king Tiberius Julius Cotis I. [24] The Bosporan kingdom was subsequently transformed into a client state of Rome with a Roman military presence in the mid-1st century AD.

The arrival of the ready and the Huns
Additional information: Migration period.
In the 3rd century AD, the Goths migrated to the lands of modern Ukraine around 250–375 AD, which they named Oyum, which corresponds to the archaeological Chernyakhiv culture.[27] The Ostrogoths remained in the area, but from the 370s came under the rule of the Huns. To the north of the Ostrogothic kingdom was the Kyivan culture, which flourished in the 2nd–5th centuries, when it was also captured by the Huns. After they helped defeat the Huns at the Battle of Nedao in 454, the Romans allowed the Ostrogoths to settle in Pannonia. Along with other ancient Greek colonies founded in the 6th century BC. on the northeastern coast of the Black Sea. the colonies of Tyre, Olbia, and Hermonassa continued to exist as Roman and Byzantine (Eastern Roman) cities until the 6th century AD. Gothic influence waned by the end of the 5th century AD, when the Eastern Roman Empire reasserted its control. and the influence of the region.[28] The Hunnic king Hordes ruled the Bosporus kingdom in the early 6th century AD and was on good terms with the Eastern Roman Emperor Justinian I, but the latter invaded and occupied the country after Hordes was killed in a revolt in 527 AD. As early as the 12th century AD, the emperors of the Eastern Roman Empire claimed to rule over the territory of the Cimmerian Bosphorus.[30]

Early Slavs
Main articles: Early Slavs
Additional information: Slavic migrations to the Balkans.
Due to the power vacuum created by the end of the Huns and ready, the early Slavs, after the Kiev culture, began to expand into most of the territory that is now Ukraine in the 5th century, and beyond it into the Balkans from the 6th century. century. Although the origin of the early Slavs is not reliably known, many theories suggest that they may have originated near Polissia.[31]

It is believed that in the 5th and 6th centuries the Union of Ants (tribal federation) was located on the territory of present-day Ukraine. Antis were the ancestors of Ukrainians: White Croats, Severians, Polyans, Drevlians, Dulibs, Ulychyns, and Tyvers. Migrations from Ukraine to the Balkans created many South Slavic peoples. The northern migrations, reaching almost to Lake Ilmen, led to the appearance of the Ilmen Slavs, Krivichi and Radimichi - groups that are the ancestors of Russians. After the invasion of the Pannonian Avars in 602 and the disintegration of the Antean Union, most of these peoples survived as separate tribes at the beginning of the second millennium.[32]

Middle age
Early Middle Ages
In the 7th century, the territory of modern Ukraine was the core of the Bulgar state (often called Old Great Bulgaria) with the capital Phanagoria. At the end of the 7th century, most of the Bulgarian tribes migrated in several directions, and the remnants of their state were absorbed by the Khazars, a semi-nomadic people from Central Asia.[27]

The Khazars founded the Khazar kingdom near the Caspian Sea and the Caucasus. The kingdom included western Kazakhstan and part of Crimea, eastern Ukraine, southern Russia and Azerbaijan. The Khazars dominated the Pontic-Caspian steppe enough that in terms of trade there was a Pax Khazarica that allowed safe long-distance trade, including groups such as the Radhanite Jews who traded as far as China as far as Tabriz, as well as trade networks surrounding Volga Bulgaria. This attracted other traders, like the Vikings of the Viking Age, who founded Kievan Rus.

Kyivskyi
Later Middle Ages
Main articles: Genoese colonies, Grand Duchy of Lithuania, and Crown of the Kingdom of Poland.
Since the 13th century, many parts of the coast of modern Ukraine were dominated by the Genoese Republic, which created numerous colonies around the Black Sea, most of which are located on the territory of today's Odesa region. The Genoese colonies were well fortified, garrisoned in fortresses, and used by the Genoese Republic mainly to dominate the Black Sea trade. Genoese rule in the region lasted until the 15th century.

In the 14th century, Poland and Lithuania fought wars against the Mongol invaders, and eventually most of Ukraine came under the rule of Poland and Lithuania. In particular, Red Little Russia, as well as part of Volhynia and Podillia, became part of Poland. The king of Poland adopted the title "lord and heir of Little Russia" (lat. Russiae dominus et Heres [46]). Lithuania took control of Polotsk, Volhynia, Chernihiv and Kyiv after the Battle of Blue Water (1362/63), and the rulers of Lithuania then assumed the title of ruler of Rus.

After the fall of Kyivan Rus and Galicia-Volhynia, their political, cultural and religious life continued under the control of Lithuania.[47] Ruthenian aristocrats, such as the Olelkovichs, were part of the ruling class of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania as members of the Grand Duchy's Privy Council, senior military leaders, and administrators.[47] Despite the fact that Lithuanian was the native language of the ruling class, the main written languages in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania were Latin, Old Slavonic, and Ruthenian, while the East Slavic chancery was replaced by Polish in the early modern period.

Eventually, Poland took control of the southwestern region. After the union of Poland and Lithuania, Poles, Germans, Lithuanians, and Jews migrated to the region, displacing Ukrainians from the positions of power they shared with Lithuanians, while more Ukrainians were forced to move to Central Ukraine as a result of Polish migration, Polonization, and other forms of Ukraine and Ukrainians , and they all began to fully take shape.

In 1490, due to increased oppression of Ukrainians by the Poles, the Ukrainian Petro Mucha led a series of successful uprisings, which were joined by other Ukrainians, such as the early Cossacks and Hutsuls, in addition to the Moldavians (Romanians). This series of battles, known as the Mukha Uprising, was supported by the Moldavian prince Stephen the Great and is one of the earliest known Ukrainian uprisings against Polish oppression. These uprisings led to the capture of several cities of Pokuttia and reached the west to Lviv, but did not capture the latter.

The decline of the Golden Horde in the 15th century made it possible to establish the Crimean Khanate, which occupied the present Black Sea coast and the southern steppes of Ukraine. Until the end of the 18th century, the Crimean Khanate maintained a massive slave trade with the Ottoman Empire and the Middle East,[50] exporting about 2 million slaves from Russia and Ukraine during the period 1500-1700.[51] It remained a vassal state of the Ottoman Empire until 1774, when it was finally dissolved by the Russian Empire in 1783.
Russian Empire and Austria-Hungary
See also: Partitions of Poland and Little Russia.
In the following decades, tsarist rule in central Ukraine gradually replaced protection. Sporadic Cossack uprisings were now directed against Russian rule, but eventually ceased by the end of the 18th century after the destruction of the Cossack forces. After the partitions of Poland in 1772, 1793 and 1795, the far west of Ukraine came under the control of the Austrians, and the rest became part of the Russian Empire. As a result of the Russo-Turkish wars, the Ottoman Empire's control over south-central Ukraine receded, while Hungary's rule over Transcarpathia continued. Ukrainian writers and intellectuals were inspired by the nationalist spirit that gripped other European nations under other imperial governments, and were determined to revive Ukrainian linguistic and cultural traditions and restore the Ukrainian nation-state, a movement that became known as Ukrainophilism. necessary]

Russia, fearing separatism, severely limited attempts to raise the Ukrainian language and culture, up to the point of banning its use and study: in 1863, the Valuyev Circular prohibited the use of the Ukrainian language in religious and educational literature, in 1876, the Emsky Decree declared Ukrainian. -language publications directly, as well as the import of texts published abroad in the Ukrainian language, the use of the Ukrainian language in theatrical productions and public readings, the use of the Ukrainian language in schools.[55] The Russophile policy of Russification and Pan-Slavism resulted in the migration of a number of Ukrainian intellectuals to Western Ukraine. However, many Ukrainians resigned themselves to their fate in the Russian Empire, and some were able to achieve great success there.

The fate of Ukrainians was completely different during the time of the Austrian Empire, where they turned out to be a pawn in the Russian-Austrian struggle for power in Central and Southern Europe. Unlike Russia, the majority of Galicia's ruling elite was of Austrian or Polish origin, while Ruthenians were almost exclusively contained in the peasantry. In the 19th century, Russophilia was a common phenomenon among the Slavic population, but the mass result of the Ukrainian intelligentsia, which fled from Russian repressions to Eastern Ukraine, as well as the intervention of the Austrian authorities, led to the change of this movement to Ukrainophilia, which would later move to the Russian Empire. With the beginning of the First World War, all those who supported Russia were surrounded by Austrian troops and placed in the Thalerhof concentration camp, where many died.
Western integration
Additional information: Relations between Ukraine and the European Union and relations between Ukraine and NATO.
On January 1, 2016, Ukraine joined the DCFTA with the EU. Citizens of Ukraine were granted visa-free entry to the Schengen area for up to 90 days in any 180-day period on June 11, 2017, and the Association Agreement officially entered into force on September 1, 2017.[87] Significant achievements in the foreign policy arena include support of anti-Russian sanctions, obtaining a visa-free regime with the countries of the European Union, the best recognition of the need to solve extremely difficult tasks within the country. However, the old local government did not want any changes; they were cleared of Antimaidan activists (lustration), but only partially. The fight against corruption was started, but it was limited to sentences for minor officials and electronic declarations, and the newly created NABU and NAZK were marked by scandals in their work. Judicial reform was combined with the appointment of old, compromised judges. The investigation of the crimes against the residents of the Maidan dragged on. The Ministry of Information Policy was created to counter the massive global Russian anti-Ukrainian propaganda of "information war", which has not shown effective work in 5 years, if we do not take into account the bans of "Kaspersky Laboratory", "Doctor Web", "1C". , Mail.ru, Yandex and Russian social networks VKontakte or Odnoklassniki and propaganda media. In 2017, the president signed the law "On Education", which met with resistance from national minorities and quarreled with the Hungarian government.

On May 19, 2018, Poroshenko signed the Decree, which implemented the decision of the NSDC on the final termination of Ukraine's participation in the statutory bodies of the Commonwealth of Independent States.[88][89] As of February 2019, Ukraine reduced its participation in the Commonwealth of Independent States to a critical minimum and actually completed its exit from it. The Verkhovna Rada did not ratify the accession, i.e. Ukraine has never been a member of the CIS.[90]

On January 6, 2019, in Fener, a delegation of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine with the participation of the President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko received the Tomos on Autocephaly. Tomos was presented to the head of the OCU, Metropolitan Epiphanius, during a joint liturgy with the Ecumenical Patriarch.[91] The next day, Tomos was brought to Ukraine for a demonstration in Sophia Cathedral. On January 9, all members of the Synod of the Orthodox Church of Constantinople signed the Tomos during the scheduled meeting of the Synod.

On February 21, 2019, the Constitution of Ukraine was amended: the norms on Ukraine's strategic course for membership in the European Union and NATO are enshrined in the preamble of the Basic Law, three articles and transitional provisions.[92]

On April 21, 2019, Volodymyr Zelenskyi was elected president in the second round of presidential elections. Early parliamentary elections on July 21 allowed the newly created pro-presidential party "Servant of the People" to obtain an absolute majority of seats (248) for the first time in the history of independent Ukraine. Party chairman Dmytro Razumkov was elected speaker of the parliament. On August 29, the majority was able to form a government independently, without forming coalitions, and approved Oleksiy Honcharuk as prime minister.[93] On March 4, 2020, due to a 1.5% drop in GDP (instead of a 4.5% increase at the time of the election), the Verkhovna Rada dismissed Honcharuk's government, and Denys Shmyhal became the new prime minister[94].[95]

On July 28, 2020, in Lublin, Lithuania, Poland and Ukraine created the "Lublin Triangle" initiative, the purpose of which is to create further cooperation between the three historical countries of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth and the further integration of Ukraine and its accession to the EU and NATO.[96]

On May 17, 2021, the Association Trio was formed by signing a joint memorandum between the foreign ministers of Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine. The Association Trio is a tripartite format for expanding cooperation, coordination and dialogue between the three countries (signed the Association Agreement with the EU) with the European Union on matters of common interest related to European integration, the activation of cooperation within the framework of the Eastern Partnership and commitment to the future accession to the European Union.[97]

At the summit in Brussels in June 2021, NATO leaders reaffirmed the decision taken at the 2008 Bucharest summit that Ukraine would become a member of the Alliance with a Membership Action Plan (MAP) as an integral part of the process and Ukraine's right to determine its own future . and foreign policy without outside interference.[98]

Ukraine was initially preparing to formally apply for EU membership in 2024, but signed the membership application instead.